.. _v1.1-release-notes:

v1.1 Release Notes
================================

Highlights in 1.1:

* App development support with a new developer interface to help with creating,
  launching, and modifying custom apps
* :ref:`Documentation for adding Jupyter to OnDemand <app-development-add-jupyter>`
* :ref:`Documentation for getting started with App Development <app-development>`
* Documentation for authenticating OnDemand using Keycloak **COMING SOON**
* Renamed "My Jobs" to "Job Composer" remove confusion

Upgrading to 1.1
----------------

See :ref:`update-apps` as there are no infrastructure changes in this release.

Components
----------

The two tables below show the versions of each infrastructure component or app that make up this release.

Infrastructure
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _v1.1-infrastructure-versions:
.. list-table:: Infrastructure Component Versions
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - Component
     - Version
   * - `ood-portal-generator`_
     - 0.4.0
   * - `mod_ood_proxy`_
     - 0.3.1
   * - `ood_auth_map`_
     - 0.0.3
   * - `nginx_stage`_
     - 0.2.1

:numref:`v1.1-infrastructure-versions` lists the versions of each component that
make up the infrastructure for this release.

Applications
^^^^^^^^^^^^

.. _v1.1-app-versions:
.. list-table:: Application Versions
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 1
   :stub-columns: 1

   * - App
     - Version
   * - `Dashboard App`_
     - 1.17.0
   * - `Shell App`_
     - 1.2.3
   * - `Files App`_
     - 1.3.5
   * - `File Editor App`_
     - 1.3.1
   * - `Active Jobs App`_
     - 1.5.1
   * - `Job Composer App`_
     - 2.6.0
   * - `Desktops App`_
     - 0.1.1

:numref:`v1.1-app-versions` lists the versions of each app for this release.

All of the above apps are installed and maintained by version 1.1.0 of the
`ood-apps-installer`_ utility.

Infrastructure Changes
----------------------

No changes from OOD 1.0.0 to 1.1.0.

App Changes
-----------

Dashboard App (from v1.15.2 to v1.17.0)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Please refer to the `Changelog <https://github.com/OSC/ood-dashboard/blob/v1.17.0/CHANGELOG.md>`__ for details.

Notable changes:

#. App development support with a new Develop menu in the Dashboard app with a
   developer interface to help with creating, launching, and modifying custom
   apps
#. Improved Interactive app interface to support debugging when developing
   interactive apps
#. Improved responsiveness of Dashboard app for smaller screens

Active Jobs App (from v1.5.0 to v1.5.1)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Please refer to the `Changelog <https://github.com/OSC/ood-activejobs/blob/v1.5.1/CHANGELOG.md>`__ for details.

Notable changes:

1. Fixed LSF bug that occurred when checking the status for a completed job that
   had completely left the queue [#lsfwarning]_

Job Composer (formerly My Jobs) App (from v2.5.0 to v2.6.0)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Please refer to the `Changelog <https://github.com/OSC/ood-myjobs/blob/v2.6.0/CHANGELOG.md>`__ for details.

Notable changes:

1. Fixed LSF bug that occurred when checking the status for a completed job that
   had completely left the queue [#lsfwarning]_
2. Renamed app from "My Jobs" to "Job Composer". This change only affects the
   name in the app views and the dashboard. The app is still deployed at
   ``/var/www/ood/apps/sys/myjobs`` and data is still stored in
   ``$HOME/ondemand/data/myjobs``

.. rubric:: Footnotes

.. [#lsfwarning] We currently don't have access to an LSF 9.1 system to properly test our LSF adapter. We only have access to LSF 8.3.

.. _ood-portal-generator: https://github.com/OSC/ood-portal-generator
.. _mod_ood_proxy: https://github.com/OSC/mod_ood_proxy
.. _ood_auth_map: https://github.com/OSC/ood_auth_map
.. _nginx_stage: https://github.com/OSC/nginx_stage
.. _Dashboard App: https://github.com/OSC/ood-dashboard
.. _Shell App: https://github.com/OSC/ood-shell
.. _Files App: https://github.com/OSC/ood-fileexplorer
.. _File Editor App: https://github.com/OSC/ood-fileeditor
.. _Active Jobs App: https://github.com/OSC/ood-activejobs
.. _Job Composer App: https://github.com/OSC/ood-myjobs
.. _Desktops App: https://github.com/OSC/bc_desktop
.. _ood-apps-installer: https://github.com/OSC/ood-apps-installer
