.. _v1.7-release-notes:

v1.7 Release Notes
==================

Highlights in 1.7:

- `Support running OnDemand with SELinux`_
- `Update project dependencies`_
- `Drop EL6 and add EL8 support`_
- `Added the Linux Host Adapter`_
- `Show account balance warnings`_
- `Job Composer and Active Jobs match Dashboard Branding`_
- `Titles for Files menu entries`_
- `Documentation for Keycloak as identity broker with CILogon and Keycloak with Duo 2FA`_
- `Add Grafana support for ActiveJobs app`_
- `Improvements to ood-portal-generator`_
- `Add an ssh wrapper to the shell app`_
- `Regenerate ood-portal.conf with every apache restart`_
- `Support sanitizing job names`_
- `nginx_clean support for a specific user`_
- `Dashboard now alerts on malformed cluster configs`_
- `Job composer now shows suggested scripts`_
- `Add ability to disable SSH to compute node link in batch connect session card`_
- `Reduced rpm size by 40 percent`_
- `New shared OnDemand gem sets`_

Special thanks
--------------

Special thanks to these contributors (alpha by first name):

- Bart Verheyde `@baverhey <https://github.com/baverhey>`_
- Guilherme Maluf Balzana `@guimaluf <https://github.com/guimaluf>`_
- Jason Buechler `@jasonbuechler <https://github.com/jasonbuechler>`_
- Shawn Rice `@zooley <https://github.com/zooley>`_

*If you contributed to the 1.7 OnDemand release and you are not on the core team and your name is not listed here please let us know and we will add you.*


Upgrading from v1.6
-------------------

.. warning:: In v1.7 support for CentOS/RedHat 6 has been dropped


Before upgrading to v1.7, please consider the following:

- If upgrading from OnDemand 1.3.x or older **you must upgrade to 1.6.x before upgrading to 1.7**. See directions for upgrading from 1.4 to 1.5 (:ref:`v1.5-release-notes`) and from 1.5 to 1.6 (:ref:`v1.6-release-notes`).
- As always please update the *development* or *test* instances of OnDemand installed at your center first to test and verify before you modify the *production* instance.
- All running PUNs must be restarted after the upgrade due to upgrading to new versions of Passenger and Ruby. It's recommended to schedule an short outage of your OnDemand instance to perform this upgrade.


#. Update OnDemand release RPM

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo yum install -y https://yum.osc.edu/ondemand/1.7/ondemand-release-web-1.7-1.noarch.rpm

#. Update OnDemand

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo yum clean all
      sudo yum update ondemand

#. Update Apache configuration and restart Apache.

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo /opt/ood/ood-portal-generator/sbin/update_ood_portal --force
      sudo systemctl try-restart httpd24-httpd.service httpd24-htcacheclean.service

   .. warning::

      Due to changes with ``ood-portal-generator`` it is necessary to run
      ``update_ood_portal`` with ``--force`` flag after upgrading to OnDemand
      1.7. The RPM upgrade will generate
      ``/opt/rh/httpd24/root/etc/httpd/conf.d/ood-portal.conf.new``. If there
      are custom manual changes made to
      ``/opt/rh/httpd24/root/etc/httpd/conf.d/ood-portal.conf`` it will be
      necessary to merge those changes in after running ``update_ood_portal
      --force``.

#. Force all PUNs to restart

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo /opt/ood/nginx_stage/sbin/nginx_stage nginx_clean -f

#. Optionally remove old dependencies from prior versions of OOD if they are not used by other applications.

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo yum remove rh-ruby24\* rh-nodejs6\* rh-git29\*


Upgrading from v1.5
-------------------

Follow the directions for upgrading to v1.6 first (:ref:`v1.6-release-notes`). After the upgrade is complete and working, follow the directions above.


Details
-------

Support running OnDemand with SELinux
.....................................

Beta support for running OnDemand with SELinux has been added. Support is enabled by installing the ``ondemand-selinux`` package. For details see :ref:`ood_selinux`

.. warning::

   If the ``ondemand-selinux`` package was installed from the OnDemand 1.6 release there are several changes that must be addressed manually.  Several SELinux booleans were enabled by the ``ondemand-selinux`` package and are no longer needed by OnDemand. The following SELinux booleans can be disabled if not used outside OnDemand:

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo setsebool -P httpd_execmem=off
      sudo setsebool -P httpd_unified=off
      sudo setsebool -P httpd_enable_homedirs=off
      sudo setsebool -P httpd_read_user_content=off

Update project dependencies
...........................

.. list-table:: Project Dependencies
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Dependency
     - Old Version
     - New Version
   * - Passenger
     - 5.3.7
     - 6.0.4
   * - NGINX
     - 1.14.0
     - 1.17.3
   * - Ruby
     - 2.4
     - 2.5
   * - NodeJS
     - 6
     - 10
   * - Rails
     - 4.2
     - 5.2
   * - noVNC
     - 1.0.0
     - 1.1.0

Drop EL6 and add EL8 support
............................

OnDemand has dropped support for CentOS/RedHat 6 and added support for CentOS/RedHat 8.

Added the Linux Host Adapter
............................

Support for running jobs directly on Linux hosts has been added. This means interactive
jobs can now run on a login node instead of through a batch scheduler.

See the documentation for the :ref:`resource-manager-linuxhost`. for more details.

Show account balance warnings
.............................

The dashboard can now show account balance warnings if the users' account balance
is some threshold.

See :ref:`these docs <balance-warnings-on-dashboard>` for more details on how to
enable this feature.

Job Composer and Active Jobs match Dashboard Branding
.....................................................

The Job Composer and Active Jobs apps' top navigation bar now share the same branding
scheme configured for the dashboard.

There's no additional configuration required for this other than what's documented
:ref:`here <branding>`.

Special thanks to `@zooley <https://github.com/zooley>`_ (Shawn Rice) for implementing this feature!

Maintenance mode
................

OOD can be put into 'maintenance mode' where it serves a static page to either all
users or a subset (staff on a VPN for example).  This static page informs users
that maintenance is underway while administrators perform disruptive tasks.

See :ref:`these docs <maintenance-mode>` on how to configure and enable this feature.

Titles for Files menu entries
.............................

The shortcuts in the files dropdown menu can now show an optional title along with the
directory path. The :ref:`original documentation <add-shortcuts-to-files-menu>` on this
feature has been updated to reflect the new options.


Documentation for Keycloak as identity broker with CILogon and Keycloak with Duo 2FA
....................................................................................

Documentation for Keycloak as identity broker with CILogon has been added in the documentation
entitled ':ref:`authentication-tutorial-oidc-keycloak-rhel7-configure-cilogon`'.

Documentation for Keycloak with Duo two factor authentication has been updated in the documentation
entitled ':ref:`authentication-duo-2fa-with-keycloak`'.

Add Grafana support for ActiveJobs app
......................................

OnDemand's ActiveJobs app can display graphs for jobs that are pulled from Grafana.
Details on how to configure Grafana support are in :ref:`these docs <grafana-support>`.

Improvements to ood-portal-generator
....................................

The ood-portal-generator app has been rewritten in Ruby and extensive testing added.
Checksums generated for ``ood-portal.conf`` now exclude comments.

Add an ssh wrapper to the shell app
...................................

An ssh wrapper script can now be used instead of just the ``ssh`` command in the
shell app.  See how to configure this :ref:`here <ssh-wrapper>`.

Special thanks to `@baverhey <https://github.com/baverhey>`_ (Bart Verheyde) for implementing this feature!

Regenerate ood-portal.conf with every apache restart
....................................................

Systemd will now regenerate the ood-portal.conf before every apache restart.  This means
administrators can now edit the ``ood_portal.yml`` configuration and then restart httpd
directly without having to do the additional step of running the ``ood-portal-generator``.

Apache httpd will read the new configuration, because a new ood-portal.conf will have
been written just before restarting.

However you will have to follow the upgrade  instructions (above), and then this will
be available.  Specifically updating the ood portal through
``sudo /opt/ood/ood-portal-generator/sbin/update_ood_portal --force``.

This feature relies on checksums generated by ``ood-portal-generator``.  If the checksums
differ (i.e., ood-portal.conf has been edited by hand, outside of the ood-portal-generator
program) this will fail and you'll have to force an update through ``update_ood_portal --force``.

Support sanitizing job names
............................

Administrators can now set the ``OOD_JOB_NAME_ILLEGAL_CHARS`` environment variable to prevent
characters from being used in job names.  For example if you do not want to use ``/`` in job
names (as is the case with some :ref:`Grid Engine <resource-manager-sge>` versions) you would
set ``OOD_JOB_NAME_ILLEGAL_CHARS: '/'`` in the ``pun_custom_env`` attribute of ``nginx_stage.yml``.

nginx_clean support for a specific user
.......................................

The ``nginx_stage nginx_clean`` command now supports a ``-u`` or ``--user`` option so it may
kill a specific users' PUN. For example ``nginx_stage nginx_clean -u johndoe`` would only
kill johndoe's PUN and disregard all the others.

Dashboard now alerts on malformed cluster configs
.................................................

Prior to 1.7 the dashboard would not start if there was a cluster cluster definition file
(the files in ``/etc/ood/config/clusters.d/``) that had invalid yaml.

The dashboard now handles this gracefully and shows an error message to the user stating that
this file is unusable and should indicate the line of the file that is problematic.

Job composer now shows suggested scripts
........................................

When changing the job script in the job composer the user is now presented with a dropdown of
'Suggested Files' first along with 'Other valid files'.

Files in folder will be suggested if they match any of these criteria:

1. Have one of these extensions: ".sh", ".job", ".slurm", ".batch", ".qsub", ".sbatch", ".srun", ".bsub"
2. The file starts with a shebang line (#!)
3. Has a resource manager's directive (#PBS, #SBATCH, #BSUB or #$) in the first 1000 characters.

Other valid files only have to meet a size requirement of less than ``OOD_MAX_SCRIPT_SIZE_KB`` which
defaults to 65 (meaning 65 kb).

Add ability to disable SSH to compute node link in batch connect session card
.............................................................................

Administrators can now disable the link that appears in the batch connects' card to ssh into the compute
node that the job is running on. This is helpful for sites that don't allow regular users to shell into
compute nodes.

To do so, simply set ``OOD_BC_SSH_TO_COMPUTE_NODE=0`` (or 'false' or 'off') in ``/etc/ood/config/apps/dashboard/env``.

Reduced rpm size by 40 percent
..............................

We reduced the size of the main OnDemand rpm by nearly 40%.

The 1.6 ondemand-1.6.22-1.el7.x86_64.rpm was 162M and in 1.7 this has been reduced by 63M to a total of 99M, split between two rpms: ondemand-gems-1.7.10-1.7.10-2.el7.x86_64.rpm with 68M, and ondemand-1.7.10-2.el7.x86_64.rpm with 31M. This is in part due to switching to a monorepo at https://github.com/osc/ondemand and installing all the gems into a central shared location, installed using the new ondemand-gems rpm.

New shared OnDemand gem sets
............................

The new ondemand-gems rpms allow other Passenger apps to be developed using the same gems that the core OnDemand apps use. If you do ``scl enable ondemand`` and then ``gem list`` you can see all the gems available.

Because the ondemand-gems rpms will include the version in the gem name, it is possible to install multiple versions of these rpms on the same system. For example, "ondemand-gems-1.7.10" is the name and "1.7.10-2.el7.x86_64.rpm" the version of ondemand-gems-1.7.10-1.7.10-2.el7.x86_64.rpm. That way you can upgrade to newer versions of OnDemand but still have the ability to provide apps access to older gems by installing the older gem sets.
