.. _v1.8-release-notes:

v1.8 Release Notes
==================

Highlights in 1.8:

- `Beta XDMoD integration in the dashboard`_
- `Default authentication is now handled by Dex`_
- `Support mod_auth_openidc configuration via ood-portal-generator`_
- `Beta CCQ Scheduler support`_
- `Retain completed jobs panel for debugging`_
- `Batch Connect apps now support multiple clusters`_
- `Batch Connect apps now support disabling caching on fields`_
- `Extended view support for GridEngine clusters`_
- `Torque and Slurm schedulers now support QoS fields`_
- `Shell hosts are now protected behind allowlists`_
- `Chinese localization`_
- `Ability to add additional info to batch connect app`_
- `Support for SVG dashboard logos`_
- `Support for new Native VNC views`_
- `Better max file upload support`_
- `Drop IE 11 support`_
- `Added Sinatra RubyGems into ondemand-gems for other apps to use`_
- `Streamlined copy and paste in noVNC for Chrome`_

Special thanks
--------------

Special thanks to https://github.com/374365283 and https://github.com/flybirdkh
of Shanghai Jiao Tong University (https://hpc.sjtu.edu.cn/) for `Chinese localization`_!

Thanks to `Ben Plessinger`_ and the whole
`University of Buffalo Center for Computational Research`_ team for help in XDMoD
integration.

Upgrading from v1.7
-------------------

Before upgrading to v1.8, please consider the following:

.. warning:: Shell hosts are now protected behind allowlists.  If you have not
    explicitly set the default SSH host, you must do so after upgrading. You must
    also update the configuration to allow shell access to any login or compute nodes.
    `See the entry in the release notes for more information. <#shell-hosts-are-now-protected-behind-allowlists>`_


- If upgrading from OnDemand 1.5.x or older **you must upgrade to 1.6.x before upgrading to 1.7**. See directions for upgrading from 1.4 to 1.5 (:ref:`v1.5-release-notes`) and from 1.5 to 1.6 (:ref:`v1.6-release-notes`).
- As always please update the *development* or *test* instances of OnDemand installed at your center first to test and verify before you modify the *production* instance.


#. Update OnDemand release RPM

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo yum install -y https://yum.osc.edu/ondemand/1.8/ondemand-release-web-1.8-1.noarch.rpm

#. Update OnDemand

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo yum clean all
      sudo yum update ondemand

#. (Optional) If previously using Apache's Basic Auth, for example with LDAP, it is recommended to switch to :ref:`Dex Authentication <authentication-dex>` by installing the ``ondemand-dex`` package.

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo yum install ondemand-dex

   .. warning::

      The configuration for Dex will need to be made to ``/etc/ood/config/ood_portal.yml`` with your needed LDAP configuration and updates to both Dex and Apache configurations.
      See :ref:`Configuring OnDemand Dex for LDAP <dex-ldap>` for details on configuration of LDAP.


#. Update Apache configuration and restart Apache.

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo /opt/ood/ood-portal-generator/sbin/update_ood_portal
      sudo systemctl try-restart httpd24-httpd.service httpd24-htcacheclean.service

#. (Optional) If ``ondemand-dex`` was installed, you must enable and start the ``ondemand-dex`` service.

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo systemctl enable ondemand-dex.service
      sudo systemctl start ondemand-dex.service

Upgrading from v1.6
-------------------

Due to changes with ``ood-portal-generator`` it is necessary to run ``update_ood_portal`` with ``--force`` flag
if upgrading from v1.6 of OnDemand to v1.8.


Details
-------

Beta XDMoD integration in the dashboard
.......................................

If your site also uses `XDMoD`_ with the Job Performance module (formerlly called SUPReMM) for job performance analysis,
you can configure OnDemandOpen OnDemand to display the Job Efficiency reports from XDMoD on the OnDemand dashboard.

See the :ref:`documentation on enabling XDMoD integration <xdmod_integration>` for more details.

Default authentication is now handled by Dex
............................................

The default authentication mechanism for OnDemand is now using the OIDC provider `Dex`_.  The Dex authentication will replace Apache's Basic Auth.  Sites wishing to continue using LDAP authentication or other forms of Basic Auth are recommended to configure Dex.
See :ref:`Dex Authentication <authentication-dex>` for details on OnDemand Dex.

You no longer need to do ``DISABLE_SAFARI_BASIC_AUTH_WARNING=1`` and you can safely remove this from the configuration as this ENV var will be ignored.

Support mod_auth_openidc configuration via ood-portal-generator
...............................................................

The Open OnDemand Portal :ref:`ood-portal-generator-configuration` file now supports defining `mod_auth_openidc`_ configurations directly.

Beta CCQ Scheduler support
..........................

We now have beta `Cloudy Cluster`_ support for their ccq scheduler.  You can find
:ref:`documentation on how to configure the cluster here <resource-manager-cloudy-cluster>`.

Retain completed jobs panel for debugging
.........................................

When an interactive job completes, its panel will now remain in the view. This is to
allow users and administrators to debug failed jobs by keeping the session id links
in view.

Batch Connect apps now support multiple clusters
................................................

Batch connect applications now support multiple clusters in their configuration
instead of just one.

Where previous configuration look like this, with only a single cluster.

.. code-block:: yaml

   cluster: "my_cluster"

Configurations will now accept an array like the example below.  This will create a
dropdown select menu item at the top of the form where users can choose between
the two options.

.. code-block:: yaml

   cluster:
     - "my_cluster"
     - "my_other_cluster"


:ref:`See the documentation on all the ways to configure which cluster to submit to.  <configuring-cluster>`

Batch Connect apps now support disabling caching on fields
..........................................................

When a user submits the web form for an interactive app (batch connect) the form
values the user set are stored in a cache file that is used to pre-populate the web
form in the future. In some cases, setting the default value of the form field to a
previously used value is undesirable. You can now disable this caching feature for
every app, on a per app basis, or on a per field basis.

:ref:`See the documentation on attribute cache enabling for more details. <caching-form-items>`

Extended view support for GridEngine clusters
.............................................

In the Active Jobs app, similar to Torque and Slurm jobs, SGE jobs will now have a details
view available where the user can see various details about their job such as walltime, Total
CPUs, etc. The view is made visible by clicking on the arrow on the far left of the table row
corresponding to the job.

The data seen in extended view is extracted from the command ``qstat -j -r -xml``.

Torque and Slurm schedulers now support QoS fields
...................................................

Torque and Slurm schedulers now support the quality of service (QoS) fields.

``qos`` is now an acceptable script attribute like so:

.. code-block:: yaml

   script:
     qos: 'best'

In Torque this translates to ``-l qos=best`` and in Slurm it is ``--qos best``.

Shell hosts are now protected behind allowlists
...............................................

Shell hosts are now protected behind allowlists. This means administrators now need
to explicitly add hosts to an allowlist for users to be able to access them through
the shell app.

Any login host of a cluster config will be allowed, assuming that cluster is not
configured as "hidden" in the metadata section of the cluster config.
However, administrators will need to add a configuration for compute nodes and any
additional hosts they wish to allow access to.

Administrators should also configure the default ssh host if they've not already done
so because 'localhost' is no longer the out of the box default.

:ref:`See the documentation for setting the default ssh host <set-default-ssh-host>`
and :ref:`the documentation for setting the allowlist for more details <set-ssh-allowlist>`.


Chinese localization
....................

The Chinese localization ``zh-CN`` is now available in the dashboard and
job composer applications for sites who wish to use it.

To enable it, simply set the ``OOD_LOCALE`` environment variable globally
in ``/etc/ood/config/nginx_stage.yml``

.. code-block:: yaml

  pun_custom_env:
     OOD_LOCALE: "zh-CN"


Ability to add additional info to batch connect app
...................................................

You can now add an info.html.erb file to an interactive app (batch connect)
directory and it will render and display in the job panel. This is useful for
providing documentation links for an app.q
:ref:`See the documentation on info.html.erb for more details. <bc_info_html_md_erb>`

Support for SVG dashboard logos
...............................

Logos can now be SVG images and controlled through the ``OOD_DASHBOARD_LOGO_HEIGHT``
configuration to resize them. :ref:`See documentation on branding for form information. <branding>`

Support for new Native VNC views
................................

Sites can now define instructions for connecting to VNC interactive jobs using a native
VNC client instead of using NoVNC through the browser.

:ref:`More details on this feature can be found here. <bc_native_vnc_view>`

Better max file upload support
..............................

While FILE_UPLOAD_MAX configuration has existed for some time, 1.8 adds the corresponding
nginx configuration so that sites can set the upload max to settings larger than 10 GiB.

:ref:`See the section in the customization page for more details. <set-upload-limits>`

Drop IE 11 support
..................

.. warning::
  No IE 11 support. If you are a site that requires IE 11 support and are willing to contribute developer time to the project to support this, please reach out to us.

IE 11 support was officially dropped. See Browser Requirements.

Added Sinatra RubyGems into ondemand-gems for other apps to use
...............................................................

Sinatra RubyGems were added to the Dashboard application, they are automatically installed with the ``ondemand-gems`` RPM.
Other applications can now get started without needing to install RubyGems into the applications directory.

.. code-block:: ruby

  gem "sinatra", require: false
  gem "sinatra-contrib", require: false
  gem "erubi", require: false

Streamlined copy and paste in noVNC for Chrome
..............................................

Copy and pasting now works out of the box in Chrome. An issue with copy and pasting large clipboard buffers into noVNC applications on Chrome was fixed in version 1.8.


.. _dex: https://github.com/dexidp/dex
.. _mod_auth_openidc: https://github.com/zmartzone/mod_auth_openidc
.. _cloudy cluster: http://cloudycluster.com/
.. _XDMOD: https://open.xdmod.org/
.. _Ben Plessinger: https://github.com/plessbd
.. _University of Buffalo Center for Computational Research: https://github.com/ubccr
