.. _v3.1-release-notes:

v3.1 Release Notes
==================

Administrative changes
----------------------

- `Breaking Changes`_
- `Deprecations`_
- `Dependency updates`_
- `Upgrade directions`_

New Features
------------

- `Globus integration`_
- `Path Selector widget`_
- `Google Analytics 4 support`_
- `Dynamic Checkboxes`_
- `Disabling uploads and downloads`_
- `Custom Javascript files`_
- `Updated Apache options`_
- `Improved shell connections`_
- `aarch64/arm64 and ppc64le packages`_
- `Amazon Linux 2023 packages`_
- `Debian 12 packages`_

Details of administrative changes
---------------------------------

Breaking Changes
................

User Settings File Change
*************************

We had to change the location of the :ref:`user settings file <user_settings_file>`
off of the ``DATAROOT`` which is cluster specific and problematic for sites that
have separate HOME directories for each cluster.

The new default location is under the ``XDG_CONFIG_HOME``. This change was made
to accomidate sites that have separate HOME directories for each cluster.

Sites who have never used this configuration do not need to do anything.

Sites that have reconfigured the :ref:`user settings file <user_settings_file>`
need to provide the full path for this file.  It's recommended that you do not
use a path in the ``DATAROOT`` as that is cluster specific.

Deprecations
............

RedHat/CentOS 7 packages deprecated
***********************************

OnDemand 3.1 will be the last OnDemand release to support RedHat/CentOS 7.

Dependency updates
..................

This release updates the following dependencies:

- Ruby 3.1 **(RHEL 8 & 9 only)**

  .. warning:: The change in Ruby version means any Ruby based apps that are not provided by the OnDemand RPM must be rebuilt or supply their own ``bin/ruby`` to use the older version of ruby.

- NodeJS 18 **(All OSes except RHEL 7)**

  .. warning:: The change in Node version means any Node based apps that are not provided by the OnDemand RPM must be rebuilt.

- Passenger 6.0.17
- NGINX 1.22.1
- ondemand-dex 2.36.0
- mod_auth_openidc 2.4.14.1 (RHEL 7 & 8 only)

Upgrade directions
..................

.. warning::

   As always please update the *development* or *test* instances of OnDemand installed at your center first to test and verify before you modify the *production* instance.

.. warning::

   The OnDemand upgrade has only been tested going from 3.0.x to 3.1.x.

#. Update OnDemand release RPM

   .. tabs::

      .. tab:: RedHat/CentOS 7

         .. code-block:: sh

            sudo yum install -y https://yum.osc.edu/ondemand/3.1/ondemand-release-web-3.1-1.el7.noarch.rpm


      .. tab:: RedHat/Rocky Linux/AlmaLinux 8

         .. code-block:: sh

            sudo yum install -y https://yum.osc.edu/ondemand/3.1/ondemand-release-web-3.1-1.el8.noarch.rpm

      .. tab:: RedHat/Rocky Linux/AlmaLinux 9

         .. code-block:: sh

            sudo yum install -y https://yum.osc.edu/ondemand/3.1/ondemand-release-web-3.1-1.el9.noarch.rpm

      .. tab:: Ubuntu 20.04

         .. code-block:: sh

            wget -O /tmp/ondemand-release-web_3.1.0-focal_all.deb https://apt.osc.edu/ondemand/3.1/ondemand-release-web_3.1.0-focal_all.deb
            sudo apt install /tmp/ondemand-release-web_3.1.0-focal_all.deb
            sudo apt update

      .. tab:: Ubuntu 22.04

         .. code-block:: sh

            wget -O /tmp/ondemand-release-web_3.1.0-jammy_all.deb https://apt.osc.edu/ondemand/3.1/ondemand-release-web_3.1.0-jammy_all.deb
            sudo apt install /tmp/ondemand-release-web_3.1.0-jammy_all.deb
            sudo apt update

#. Enable dependencies

   **RHEL/Rocky/AlmaLinux 8 & 9 only**

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo dnf module reset nodejs
      sudo dnf module enable nodejs:18
      sudo dnf module reset ruby
      sudo dnf module enable ruby:3.1

#. Update OnDemand

   .. tabs::

      .. tab:: yum/dnf

         .. code-block:: sh

            sudo yum clean all
            sudo yum update ondemand


      .. tab:: apt

         .. code-block:: sh

            sudo apt-get --only-upgrade install ondemand

#. (Optional) If using Dex based authentiction, update the ``ondemand-dex`` package.

   .. tabs::

      .. tab:: yum/dnf

         .. code-block:: sh

            sudo yum update ondemand-dex


      .. tab:: apt

         .. code-block:: sh

            sudo apt-get --only-upgrade install ondemand-dex

#. Update Apache configuration and restart Apache.

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo /opt/ood/ood-portal-generator/sbin/update_ood_portal

   .. tabs::

      .. tab:: RedHat/CentOS 7

         .. code-block:: sh

            sudo systemctl try-restart httpd24-httpd.service

      .. tab:: RedHat/Rocky Linux/AlmaLinux 8 & 9

         .. code-block:: sh

            sudo systemctl try-restart httpd

      .. tab:: Ubuntu 20.04 & 22.04

         .. code-block:: sh

            sudo systemctl try-restart apache2

#. (Optional) If ``ondemand-dex`` was installed, restart the ``ondemand-dex`` service.

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo systemctl try-restart ondemand-dex.service

#. (Optional) If ``ondemand-selinux`` was installed, see :ref:`ood_selinux_updates`

#. Force all PUNs to restart

   .. code-block:: sh

      sudo /opt/ood/nginx_stage/sbin/nginx_stage nginx_clean -f

Details of new features
-----------------------

Globus integration
..................

The files application will now provide a link to Globus endpoints
when users navigate to a directory that is within that endpoint.

Administrators need to configure OnDemand to map directories
to Globus endpoints.  Refer to the
:ref:`configuration entry for enabling globus endpoints <globus_endpoints>`.

Path Selector widget
....................

Open OnDemand now ships it's own ``path_selector`` form widet.
This replaces the library at https://github.com/osc/bc_js_filepicker
for centers that have or do use this library.

You can go here to find :ref:`details on the path selector <path_selector>`.

Google Analytics 4 support
..........................

Google Analytics has updated since version 3.0 and 3.1 has support now for
this update.

Refer to the :ref:`google analytics configuration <google_analytics_tag_id>`
for how to configure this.

Dynamic Checkboxes
..................

``check_box`` form widgets can now be used with dynamic ``data-set`` and
``data-hide`` directives.

Refer to :ref:`dynamic-bc-apps` for more details.

Disabling uploads and downloads
...............................

Sites can now disable uploads and downloads through the file
browser.  See the configuration for :ref:`disabling downloads <downlad_enabled>`
and :ref:`disabling uploads <upload_enabled>` for how to configure this.

Custom Javascript files
.......................

Sites can now add custom javascript files that will get loaded on every
page of the dashboard application.  Refer to the
:ref:`custom_javascript_files configuration property <custom_javascript_files>`
for more information.

Support added for completed.{md,html}.erb
.........................................

Sites can now add a ``completed.{md,html}.erb`` to interactive applications
to display information on the session's card when the job has completed.

See :ref:`bc_completed_html_md_erb` for more information.

Updated Apache options
......................

We've updated ``ood_portal.yml`` for two common apache configurations
sites may wish to enable.

The first is to :ref:`disable apache logging <disable_logs>` in favor of
supplying a global log configuration in a seperate file.

The second is to alllow for custom directives.  You can now supply
:ref:`custom location directives <custom_location_directives>`
and :ref:`custom virtual host directives <custom_vhost_directives>`.

Improved shell connections
..........................

The shell app has been updated so that shell sessions can last longer.
The app is better at keeping the connection alive, meaning users
will maintain shell sessions for longer.

aarch64/arm64 and ppc64le packages
..................................

Added aarch64/arm64 and ppc64le packages for some operating systems.
See :ref:`Supported Operating Systems and Architectures <os-support>`
for a full list of which operating systems support aarch64 and ppc64le.


Amazon Linux 2023 packages
..........................

Added Amazon Linux 2023 packages.
See :ref:`install-software` for installation instructions.

Debian 12 packages
..................

Added Debian 12 packages.
See :ref:`install-software` for installation instructions.
